docs(monitoring): document Prometheus NetworkPolicy access (#1425)
longhorn/website: content/docs/1.12.1/monitoring/prometheus-and-grafana-setup.md

Longhorn ServiceMonitor is a [Prometheus Operator](https://prometheus-operator.dev/) custom resource. This setup allows the Prometheus server to discover all Longhorn Manager pods and their respective endpoints.

> ServiceMonitor provides endpoint discovery, but it does not authorize network traffic to Longhorn Manager pods. Starting with v1.12.1, `networkPolicies.restrictInternalTraffic` independently defaults to `true`, while `networkPolicies.enabled` controls only the UI frontend policy.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ServiceMonitor provides endpoint discovery, but it does not authorize network traffic to Longhorn Manager pods. Starting with v1.12.1, `networkPolicies.restrictInternalTraffic` defaults to `true` independently, while `networkPolicies.enabled` controls only the UI frontend policy.
```

> ServiceMonitor provides endpoint discovery, but it does not authorize network traffic to Longhorn Manager pods. Starting with v1.12.1, `networkPolicies.restrictInternalTraffic` defaults to `true` independently, while `networkPolicies.enabled` controls only the UI frontend policy.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> **Note:** ServiceMonitor provides endpoint discovery, but does not automatically authorize network traffic to Longhorn Manager pods. 
> 
> **Important changes in v1.12.1:**
> * `networkPolicies.restrictInternalTraffic` operates independently and defaults to `true` (which may block monitoring traffic if not explicitly permitted).
> * `networkPolicies.enabled` now controls *only* the UI frontend policy.
```

          role: alert-rules
    ```

> 1. Because ServiceMonitor discovery does not authorize traffic, follow the inline comments in the [scoped additive NetworkPolicy example](https://github.com/longhorn/longhorn/blob/master/examples/network-policy/allow-prometheus-to-longhorn-manager.yaml) to customize both the namespace and pod selectors for your environment, then apply it in `longhorn-system` without changing `networkPolicies.restrictInternalTraffic`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When networkPolicies.restrictInternalTraffic is enabled, Longhorn restricts ingress traffic to longhorn-manager to the Longhorn components allowed by its NetworkPolicy. Prometheus or other monitoring agents are not included in this allow-list, so scraping longhorn-manager:9500/metrics can be blocked even when a ServiceMonitor is configured. A ServiceMonitor only discovers the metrics endpoint; it does not authorize network traffic to the target.

If you need to scrape Longhorn metrics while keeping the internal traffic restrictions enabled, add a narrowly scoped NetworkPolicy that allows your monitoring pods to access longhorn-manager on TCP port 9500. Follow the inline comments in the [scoped additive NetworkPolicy example](https://github.com/longhorn/longhorn/blob/master/examples/network-policy/allow-prometheus-to-longhorn-manager.yaml?utm_source=chatgpt.com) to customize the namespace and pod selectors for your monitoring environment, and apply the policy in longhorn-system. This approach has been validated as a workaround in production.
```

Reviewer: Added more context.

    If you need to scrape Longhorn metrics while keeping the internal traffic restrictions enabled, add a narrowly scoped NetworkPolicy that allows your monitoring pods to access `longhorn-manager` on TCP port 9500. Follow the inline comments in the [scoped additive NetworkPolicy example](https://github.com/longhorn/longhorn/blob/master/examples/network-policy/allow-prometheus-to-longhorn-manager.yaml) to customize the namespace and pod selectors for your monitoring environment, and apply the policy in `longhorn-system`. This approach has been validated as a workaround in production.

>     The example combines `namespaceSelector` and `podSelector` in one `from` item so both selectors must match. Port 9500 also serves the Longhorn API, so do not replace the combined selectors with a namespace-only allowance unless that broader API access is intended. See the [Network Policy guide](../../advanced-resources/security/network-policy) for details.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1.  **The Issue:** When `networkPolicies.restrictInternalTraffic` is enabled, Longhorn restricts ingress traffic to `longhorn-manager` to specific Longhorn components. Prometheus and other monitoring agents are not included in this allow-list. Because a ServiceMonitor only discovers endpoints and does not authorize traffic, scraping `longhorn-manager:9500/metrics` is blocked by default.

    **The Solution:** To safely scrape metrics, apply a narrowly scoped NetworkPolicy in the `longhorn-system` namespace that allows your monitoring pods to access `longhorn-manager` on TCP port 9500. You can customize the selectors in this [scoped additive NetworkPolicy example](https://github.com/longhorn/longhorn/blob/master/examples/network-policy/allow-prometheus-to-longhorn-manager.yaml) for your monitoring environment.

    > **Warning:** Port 9500 serves both metrics **and** the Longhorn API. The linked example combines `namespaceSelector` and `podSelector` in a single `from` item to ensure both must match. Do not broaden this to a namespace-only allowance unless you intend to expose the Longhorn API to that entire namespace. See the [Network Policy guide](../../advanced-resources/security/network-policy) for details.
```

>     > **Tip:** Adjust the `from` rule to match the namespace and stable pod labels used by your scraper. Keep `namespaceSelector` and `podSelector` in the same `from` item so both selectors must match. Check the available labels with `kubectl -n <monitoring-namespace> get pods --show-labels`. If the scraper's pod labels cannot be customized and a namespace-only rule is unavoidable, use a dedicated, trusted monitoring namespace. A namespace-only rule allows every pod in the selected namespace to reach port 9500, including the Longhorn API.

Reviewer: Need to mention https://github.com/longhorn/longhorn/pull/13766/changes#diff-f495b8f38627128e679ed2174c51d9f34622bb198c3b132d63066a4954e71e4eR14-R18

          role: alert-rules
    ```

1. Because ServiceMonitor discovery does not authorize traffic, apply this additive NetworkPolicy in `longhorn-system` without changing `networkPolicies.restrictInternalTraffic`.

    ```yaml

>     apiVersion: networking.k8s.io/v1

Reviewer: Can we add the additive NetworkPolicy to https://github.com/longhorn/longhorn/tree/master/examples/network-policy?
